I became obsessed with records when I
was about 12 years old my parents used
to give me money to eat and on most days
instead of eating I would save it and
buy myself a record at the end of the
week Here I am with a gigantic walkman
that's about half my leg
it actually looks more like a VCR so
when I was a teenager the obsession of
buying cassettes vinyls and CDs just
just kept growing I was even working in
a record store for many years and only
ever got paid in records
one day I realized that I had thousands
of records more that I could even listen
to in my life I became what many of us
are record junkies or record diggers as
we like to call ourselves record digging
as the name suggests means getting your
hands dirty it means spending hours
rummaging through warehouses church
basements yard sales record stores all
to find records that have been forgotten
for decades records that have become
cultural wastes the earliest record
collectors from about the 30s to the
1960s found and preserved so many
important records that would have been
lost forever in those days most cultural
and public institutions didn't really
care to preserve these treasures in many
cases they were just throwing them to
the garbage record digging is a
lifestyle were absolutely obsessed with
obscure records expensive records dollar
bin records crazy artwork sub subgenres
and all of the tiniest details that go
with each release when the media talks
about the vinyl revival that's been
happening these last few years they
often forget to mention this community
that's been keeping the vinyl and the
tradition and the culture alive for
these last 30 years it's a very
close-knit but a competitive society a
little bit because when you're hunting
for extremely rare records if you miss
your opportunity you might not see that
record ever in your life
but I guess the only person in here
truly impressed by record collectors is
another record collector to the outside
world we seem like a very weird oddball
group of individuals and and they're
mostly right all the record collectors I
know are obsessive maniacs we know we're
all crazy in some way but I think we
should be viewed a little bit more like
this where music archeologists were
hunting down the lost artifact we all
have a list of records that we would do
anything to get our hands on that we've
been chasing for years and we actually
call this list our holy grails when
you're digging for records you're
surrounded by music you don't know
you're surrounded by mystery and by all
these dreams records that people once
believed in imagine the thousands of
artists who were destined to be legend
but for various reasons were just
overlooked many of these records only
exists in a handful of copies and some
have never even been found never been
heard they're literally endangered
species I'll tell you a story that for
me sort of sums up the value of the work
of record diggers the story of a
brilliant Montreal musician and composer
auntie piano l was born and raised in
Haiti but he lived briefly in the US and
in Belgium he passed through Montreal
what was supposed to be for two weeks
but he ended up staying for the next 40
years when he was young he learned to
play piano and developed a very
particular way of playing his instrument
very fast and almost like a percussion
his style was a mix of his Haitian
influences and folklore
mixed with the American influences that
he grew up hearing so he created a mix
of compa mixed with funk and jazz as a
young man he played and toured with live
bands in the US and in Europe but had
never recorded an album or a song before
moving to Canada it was in Montreal in
1979 that he released his first album
called piano completely on his own on
original records he only made what he
could afford 2000 copies of the record
the record received a little bit of
play a little bit of support in Canada
and in Haiti but without a big label
behind it it was very very difficult
back then if your record wasn't getting
played on mainstream radio if you
weren't in jukeboxes or if you weren't
invited to play on TV the odds were
completely against you releasing an
album as an as an independent artist was
so much more difficult than it is today
both in terms of being heard and just
distributing the thing so soon after he
released the second album kept a busy
schedule playing piano in various clubs
in the city but his records started to
accumulate dust slowly and those 2,000
copies in the span of 30 years easily
started to get lost
until only a few copies in the world
remain then in the mid-2000s a Montreal
record digger that goes by the name
cabal was doing his weekly rounds of
just hunting for records he was in the
flea market surrounded by thousands of
other dirty dusty moldy records that's
where he found the piano album he wasn't
specifically looking for it actually you
could say it sort of found him you could
also say that after 20 years of record
digging every single week he had
developed a sixth sense for finding the
gold
he took the record and inspected at the
front the artwork the back the liner
notes and he was intrigued by the fact
that this Haitian musician made a record
in Quebec in the late 70s so he was you
know he was intrigued he took out his
little plastic portable turntable that
he brought with him whenever he was on
these digging quests and put the record
on so why don't we do the same thing
[Music]
he fell in love he fell in love with the
music instantly but he had to know the
backstory behind it he didn't know where
it came from
he knew the artists at the time of the
recording was living in Montreal so for
months he tried to track him down
he even found Noelle's business card
inside the record sleeve that's that's
how DIY ami pol was so he found the card
inside the the record sleeve of course
he did try to call but after 30 years
the number didn't work anymore
so it was only in Belgium where the
artist had once lived that Koval managed
to find someone that knew the artist
personally and gave him the contact so
when he finally sat down with the artist
he told him and he made him a promise to
someday find a way to get the album
re-released he then arranged through a
British label called wah-wah 45s to get
the two albums reissued and what happens
very often is in these reissue projects
and it becomes very difficult to find
the master tapes the original recording
of the sessions art can be destroyed by
fires floods earthquakes thrown in the
garbage or just lost forever but
thankfully the Oggy pol tapes were safe
and they were ready for remastering the
record was finally re-released and
received praise from music critics DJ's
and listeners worldwide the praise that
it should have received in 1979 the
artist was so inspired that he decided
to revive his music career get back on a
stage and play for new audiences the
artists now in his 60s told me this
changed everything for me I went from
planning my retirement to playing on the
BBC radio in London and as Oh Canada and
more but also it gave him a chance to
play in front of his three sons for the
first time to me the story shows
perfectly the work of record diggers at
his best
beyond the rarity and the dollar value
and I'll be honest
we're totally obsessed by that the true
beauty is to give art a second chance to
save art from oblivion
the work of a good record digger is a
constant loop of three phases the first
thing we do is hunt we spend hours days
years of our lives rummaging through
dirty and dusty record bins everything
that we can do to find our finer hands
on the gold yes you can find good
records online but for the deepest
treasures you need to get off the couch
and it into the wild that's why we call
it record digging and not record
clicking so what we are as music
archeologists but then the next thing we
do is we gather based on our taste
expertise personal agenda we choose
carefully which records to save which
records means something to us we then
try and find out every little thing we
can about that record the artists the
label and super vital information like
who's that playing trumpet on track
three then we file them we contextualize
them and we keep them safe we are music
archivists and the last thing we do to
close the loop as we share most record
diggers that I know have some sort of a
way to share their discovery and elevate
the artists through an album reissue a
web article a radio show we give records
back to their rightful place in music
history
we are taste makers and curators we are
musicologists so for myself and most of
the record collectors I've encountered
in 20 years I think that we all have
some sort of an outlet for these
discoveries I think it's our way to keep
our sanity and and and sort of sense of
purpose in this very maddening obsession
because it can be sort of a lonely one
but I think we also do it because it
serves the human need to pass along
cultural knowledge speaking of the need
for curation in an era of overwhelming
choice it's been demonstrated that too
much choice actually hinders discovery
for example if you're trying to watch
something on Netflix you're actually
only browsing through a catalogue of six
thousand six thousand titles now compare
that with Spotify if you want to pick
something to listen to you're browsing
through a catalogue of 30 million songs
right so I think as you can see this
notion of paralysis by choice effects
music is more than movies for example
and there's a few studies that are
starting to show the effects of this
a recent look at the UK music market
shows that the top 1% of artists in the
UK are actually earning 77 percent of
the total revenues inside the music
industry and that's 2013 and that's
progressively getting worse or you know
progressing anyway if you're in the 1%
I'm sure you're happy so the takeaway
for me is it's easier for people to to
listen to music than ever before people
have more music at their disposal than
ever before yet people choose to listen
to more of the same music than ever
before and that's a sad thing inspired
by my love for music research record
digging and curation I started a website
called music as my sanctuary in 2007 our
slogan has always been future classics
and forgotten treasures and it shows our
love for discovering music and
introducing music both old and new from
humble beginnings we've built a
worldwide platform with a massive
audience with over 100 collaborators
we've created over 10,000 pieces of
content over 500 hours of audio content
our audience consists of people who just
want more than what's being offered to
them by mainstream music channels they
want to do they want to dig deeper but
they don't necessarily have 20 hours a
week like us nerds
so they trust us to do that for them
curation is at the heart of everything
we do we believe in human
recommendations over algorithm I could
talk about the passion of record digging
for days but let me conclude this way
after many years of doing it a record
collectors collection becomes sort of
his autobiography last year I was DJing
in Poland and the people that were
hosting me they had this amazing record
collection and of course I was intrigued
and I said are you selling these they
then explained to me that it was the
collection that belonged to their dear
friend Maceo who passed away a few
months earlier and they were doing a
project of inviting different people to
take the collection and to create
something new from it
where
sampling or DJ Mix's or you know just to
give it a second life and so after a few
hours of going through the collection
myself and creating a DJ mix from it
even though I'd never got the chance to
meet him it felt like in a special way
me and him we got to talk about records
for a few hours so as record diggers our
work and our record collections our past
are there to be passed on to the next
generation
beautiful art deserves to be cherished
shared and rediscovered embrace curators
we are alternative voices to the
mainstream music channels digital or
otherwise go beyond the algorithm
whatever kind of music you like there
are so many websites radio shows DJs
record stores out there that are just
waiting to share their discoveries with
you we do this work for you all you have
to do is open your ears and take risks
this music will change your life thank
you
[Applause]